As they worked
the ravens brought them constant tidings.
In this way
they learned that the Elvenking had
turned aside to the Lake,
and they still had a breathing space.
Better still,
they heard that three of their ponies had escaped
and were wandering wild
far down the banks of the Running River,
not far from where the rest of their stores had been left.
So while the others went on with their work,
Fili and Kili were sent,
guided by a raven,
to find the ponies
and bring back all they could.
They were four days gone,
and by that time
they knew that the joined armies of the Lake-men and the Elves
were hurrying towards the Mountain.
But now their hopes were higher;
for they had food
for some weeks
with care —
chiefly cram,
of course,
and they were very tired of it;
but cram is much better than nothing —
and already the gate was blocked with a wall of squared stones laid dry,
but very thick
and high across the opening.
There were holes in the wall
through which they could see
or shoot
but no entrance.
They climbed in or out with ladders,
and hauled stuff up with ropes.
For the issuing of the stream
they had contrived a small low arch
under the new wall;
but near the entrance
they had so altered the narrow bed
that a wide pool stretched from the mountain-wall to the head of the fall
over which the stream went towards Dale.
Approach to the Gate was now only possible,
without swimming,
along a narrow ledge of the cliff,
to the right as one looked outwards from the wall.
The ponies they had brought only to the head of the steps above the old bridge,
and unloading them there
had bidden them return to their masters
and sent them back riderless to the South.
There came a night when suddenly there were many lights
as of fires and torches
away south in Dale before them.
“They have come!”
called Balin.
“And their camp is very great.
They must have come into the valley
under the cover of dusk along both banks of the river.”
That night the dwarves slept little.
The morning was still pale
when they saw a company approaching.
From behind their wall
they watched them come up to the valley’s head
and climb slowly up.
Before long they could see that both men of the lake
armed as if for war
and elvish bowmen
were among them.
At length the foremost of these
climbed the tumbled rocks
and appeared at the top of the falls;
and very great was their surprise
to see the pool before them
and the Gate blocked with a wall of new-hewn stone.
As they stood pointing and speaking to one another
Thorin hailed them:
“Who are you,”
he called in a very loud voice,
“that come as if in war to the gates of Thorin son of Thrain,
King under the Mountain,
and what do you desire?”
But they answered nothing.
Some turned swiftly back,
and the others after gazing for a while at the Gate and its defences
soon followed them.
That day the camp was moved
and was brought right between the arms of the Mountain.
The rocks echoed then with voices and with song,
as they had not done for many a day.
There was the sound, too,
of elven-harps and of sweet music;
and as it echoed up towards them
it seemed that the chill of the air was warmed,
and they caught faintly
the fragrance of woodland flowers blossoming in spring.
Then Bilbo longed to escape from the dark fortress
and to go down and join in the mirth and feasting by the fires.
Some of the younger dwarves were moved in their hearts, too,
and they muttered that they wished things had fallen out otherwise
and that they might welcome such folk as friends;
but Thorin scowled.
Then the dwarves themselves
brought forth harps and instruments regained from the hoard,
and made music to soften his mood;
but their song was not as elvish song,
and was much like the song they had sung long before
in Bilbo’s little hobbit-hole.