Chapter 10.
A Warm Welcome
The day grew lighter and warmer as they floated along.
After a while the river rounded a steep shoulder of land that came down upon their left.
Under its rocky feet
like an inland cliff
the deepest stream had flowed lapping and bubbling.
Suddenly the cliff fell away.
The shores sank.
The trees ended.
Then Bilbo saw a sight:
The lands opened wide about him,
filled with the waters of the river which broke up
and wandered in a hundred winding courses,
or halted in marshes and pools dotted with isles on every side:
but still a strong water flowed on steadily through the midst.
And far away,
its dark head in a torn cloud,
there loomed the Mountain!
Its nearest neighbours to the North-East
and the tumbled land that joined it to them
could not be seen.
All alone it rose and looked across the marshes to the forest.
The Lonely Mountain!
Bilbo had come far
and through many adventures to see it,
and now he did not like the look of it in the least.
As he listened to the talk of the raftmen
and pieced together the scraps of information they let fall,
he soon realized that he was very fortunate
ever to have seen it at all,
even from this distance.
Dreary as had been his imprisonment and unpleasant as was his position
to say nothing of the poor dwarves underneath him
still,
he had been more lucky than he had guessed.
The talk was all of the trade
that came and went on the waterways
and the growth of the traffic on the river
as the roads out of the East towards Mirkwood
vanished or fellinto disuse;
and of the bickerings of the Lake-men
and the Wood-elves about the upkeep of the Forest River
and the care of the banks.
Those lands had changed much
since the days when dwarves dwelt in the Mountain,
days which most people now remembered only as a very shadowy tradition.
They had changed even in recent years,
and since the last news that Gandalf had had of them.
Great floods and rains had swollen the waters that flowed east;
and there had been an earthquake or two
which some were inclined to attribute to the dragon —
alluding to him chiefly with a curse
and an ominous nod in the direction of the Mountain.
The marshes and bogs had spread wider and wider on either side.
Paths had vanished,
and many a rider and wanderer too,
if they had tried to find the lost ways across.
The elf-road through the wood which the dwarves had followed on the advice of Beorn
now came to a doubtful and little used end at the eastern edge of the forest;
only the river offered any longer a safe way from the skirts of Mirkwood in the North
to the mountain-shadowed plains beyond,
and the river was guarded by the Wood-elves’ king.
So you see
Bilbo had come in the end by the only road that was any good.
It might have been some comfort to Mr. Baggins shivering on the barrels,
if he had known that news of this
had reached Gandalf far away and given him great anxiety,
and that he was in fact finishing his other business
which does not come into this tale
and getting ready to come in search of Thorin’s company.
But Bilbo did not know it.
All he knew
was that the river seemed to go on and on and on for ever,
and he was hungry,
and had a nasty cold in the nose,
and did not like the way the Mountain seemed to frown at him
and threaten him as it drew ever nearer.
After a while, however,
the river took a more southerly course
and the Mountain receded again,
and at last,
late in the day the shores grew rocky,
the river gathered all its wandering waters together into a deep and rapid flood,
and they swept along at great speed.
The sun had set when turning with another sweep
towards the East
the forest-river rushed into the Long Lake.
There it had a wide mouth with stony clifflike gates at either side
whose feet were piled with shingles.
The Long Lake!
Bilbo had never imagined that any water that was not the sea could look so big.
It was so wide that the opposite shores looked small and far,
but it was so long that its northerly end,
which pointed towards the Mountain,
could not be seen at all.