At length he spoke again:
“This is no time for angry words, Master,
or for considering weighty plans of change.
There is work to do.
I serve you still —
though after a while I may think again of your words and go North
with any that will follow me.”
Then he strode off to help in the ordering of the camps
and in the care of the sick and the wounded.
But the Master scowled at his back as he went,
and remained sitting on the ground.
He thought much
but said little,
unless it was to call loudly for men to bring him fire and food.
Now everywhere Bard went
he found talk running like fire among the people
concerning the vast treasure that was now unguarded.
Men spoke of the recompense for all their harm
that they would soon get from it,
and wealth over and to spare
with which to buy rich things from the South;
and it cheered them greatly in their plight.
That was as well,
for the night was bitter and miserable.
Shelters could be contrived for few
the Master had one
and there was little food
even the Master went short.
Many took ill of wet and cold and sorrow that night,
and afterwards died,
who had escaped uninjured from the ruin of the town;
and in the days that followed
there was much sickness and great hunger.
Meanwhile Bard took the lead,
and ordered things as he wished,
though always in the Master’s name,
and he had a hard task to govern the people and direct the preparations for their protection and housing.
Probably most of them
would have perished in the winter
that now hurried after autumn,
if help had not been to hand.
But help came swiftly;
for Bard at once had speedy messengers sent up the river to the Forest
to ask the aid of the King of the Elves of the Wood,
and these messengers had found a host
already on the move,
although it was then only the third day after the fall of Smaug.
The Elvenking had received news from his own messengers
and from the birds that loved his folk,
and already knew much of what had happened.
Very great indeed was the commotion among all things with wings
that dwelt on the borders of the Desolation of the Dragon.
The air was filled with circling flocks,
and their swift-flying messengers flew here and there across the sky.
Above the borders of the Forest there was whistling,
crying and piping.
Far over Mirkwood tidings spread:
“Smaug is dead!”
Leaves rustled and startled ears were lifted.
Even before the Elvenking rode forth
the news had passed west
right to the pinewoods of the Misty Mountains;
Beorn had heard it in his wooden house,
and the goblins were at council in their caves.
“That will be the last we shall hear of Thorin Oakenshield, I fear,”
said the king.
“He would have done better to have remained my guest.
It is an ill wind,
all the same,”
he added,
“that blows no one any good.”
For he too had not forgotten the legend of the wealth of Thror.
So it was that Bard’s messengers found him now marching with many spearmen and bowmen;
and crows were gathered thick,
above him,
for they thought that war was awakening again,
such as had not been in those parts for a long age.
But the king,
when he received the prayers of Bard,
had pity,
for he was the lord of a good and kindly people;
so turning his march,
which had at first been direct towards the Mountain,
he hastened now down the river to the Long Lake.
He had not boats or rafts enough for his host,
and they were forced to go the slower way by foot;
but great store of goods he sent ahead by water.
Still elves are light-footed,
and though they were not in these days much used to the marches and the treacherous lands between the Forest and the Lake,
their going was swift.
Only five days after the death of the dragon
they came upon the shores
and looked on the ruins of the town.
Their welcome was good,
as may be expected,
and the men and their Master
were ready to make any bargain for the future
in return for the Elvenking’s aid.
Their plans were soon made.
With the women and the children,
the old and the unfit,
the Master remained behind;
and with him were some men of crafts and many skilled elves;
and they busied themselves felling trees,
and collecting the timber sent down from the Forest.
Then they set about raising many huts by the shore
against the oncoming winter;
and also under the Master’s direction
they began the planning of a new town,
designed more fair
and large
even than before,
but not in the same place.
They removed northward higher up the shore;
for ever after
they had a dread of the water where the dragon lay.
He would never again return to his golden bed,
but was stretched
cold as stone,
twisted upon the floor of the shallows.
There
for ages
his huge bones could be seen in calm weather amid the ruined piles of the old town.
But few dared to cross the cursed spot,
and none dared to dive into the shivering water
or recover the precious stones that fell from his rotting carcass.
But all the men of arms
who were still able,
and the most of the Elvenking’s array,
got ready to march north to the Mountain.
It was thus
that in eleven days from the ruin of the town
the head of their host passed the rock-gates at the end of the lake
and came into the desolate lands.