Still the next morning dawned bright and fair again.
There was an autumn-like mist white upon the ground and the air was chill,
but soon the sun rose red in the East
and the mists vanished,
and while the shadows were still long
they were off again.
So they rode now for two more days,
and all the while they saw nothing save grass and flowers and birds and scattered trees,
and occasionally small herds of red deer browsing or sitting at noon in the shade.
Sometimes Bilbo saw the horns of the harts sticking up out of the long grass,
and at first he thought they were the dead branches of trees.
That third evening they were so eager to press on,
for Beorn had said that they should reach the forest-gate early on the fourth day,
that they rode still forward after dusk
and into the night beneath the moon.
As the light faded
Bilbo thought he saw away to the right,
or to the left,
the shadowy form of a great bear prowling along in the same direction.
But if he dared to mention it to Gandalf,
the wizard only said:
“Hush!
Take no notice!”
Next day they started before dawn,
though their night had been short.
As soon as it was light
they could see the forest coming as it were to meet them,
or waiting for them like a black and frowning wall before them.
The land began to slope up
and up,
and it seemed to the hobbit
that a silence began to draw in upon them.
Birds began to sing less.
There were no more deer;
not even rabbits were to be seen.
By the afternoon they had reached the eaves of Mirkwood,
and were resting almost beneath the great overhanging boughs of its outer trees.
Their trunks were huge and gnarled,
their branches twisted,
their leaves were dark and long.
Ivy grew on them
and trailed along the ground.
“Well, here is Mirkwood!”
said Gandalf.
“The greatest of the forests of the Northern world.
I hope you like the look of it.
Now you must send back these excellent ponies you have borrowed.”
The dwarves were inclined to grumble at this,
but the wizard told them they were fools.
“Beorn is not as far off as you seem to think,
and you had better keep your promises anyway,
for he is a bad enemy.
Mr. Baggins’ eyes are sharper than yours,
if you have not seen each night after dark a great bear going along with us
or sitting far of in the moon watching our camps.
Not only to guard you and guide you,
but to keep an eye on the ponies too.
Beorn may be your friend,
but he loves his animals as his children.
You do not guess what kindness he has shown you in letting dwarves ride them so far and so fast,
nor what would happen to you,
if you tried to take them into the forest.”
“What about the horse, then?”
said Thorin.
“You don’t mention sending that back.”
“I don’t, because I am not sending it.”
“What about your promise then?”
“I will look after that.
I am not sending the horse back,
I am riding it!”
Then they knew that Gandalf was going to leave them
at the very edge of Mirkwood,
and they were in despair.
But nothing they could say would change his mind.
“Now we had this all out before,
when we landed on the Carrock,”
he said.
“It is no use arguing.
I have,
as I told you,
some pressing business away south;
and I am already late
through bothering with you people.
We may meet again before all is over,
and then again of course we may not.
That depends on your luck
and on your courage and sense;
and I am sending Mr. Baggins with you.
I have told you before
that he has more about him than you guess,
and you will find that out before long.
So cheer up Bilbo and don’t look so glum.
Cheer up Thorin and Company!
This is your expedition after all.
Think of the treasure at the end,
and forget the forest and the dragon,
at any rate until tomorrow morning!”
When tomorrow morning came
he still said the same.
So now there was nothing left to do but to fill their water-skins at a clear spring they found close to the forest-gate,
and unpack the ponies.