“Yes;
not a bad fellow as wizards go, I believe.
I used to see him now and again,”
said Beorn.
“Well, now I know who you are,
or who you say you are.
What do you want?”
“To tell you the truth,
we have lost our luggage and nearly lost our way,
and are rather in need of help, or at least advice.
I may say we have had rather a bad time with goblins in the mountains.”
“Goblins?”
said the big man less gruffly.
“Oho,
so you’ve been having trouble with them, have you?
What did you go near them for?”
“We did not mean to.
They surprised us at night in a pass which we had to cross,
we were coming out of the Lands over West into these countries —
it is a long tale.”
“Then you had better come inside and tell me some of it,
if it won’t take all day,”
said the man leading the way through a dark door that opened out of the courtyard into the house.
Following him they found themselves in a wide hall with a fire-place in the middle.
Though it was summer
there was a wood-fire burning and the smoke was rising to the blackened rafters in search of the way out
through an opening in the roof.
They passed through this dim hall,
lit only by the fire and the hole above it,
and came through another smaller door
into a sort of veranda
propped on wooden posts made of single tree-trunks.
It faced south and was still warm and filled with the light of the westering sun which slanted into it,
and fell golden on the garden full of flowers that came right up to the steps.
Here they sat on wooden benches
while Gandalf began his tale,
and Bilbo swung his dangling legs and looked at the flowers in the garden,
wondering what their names could be,
as he had never seen half of them before.
“I was coming over the mountains with a friend or two …”
said the wizard.
“Or two?
I can only see one,
and a little one at that,”
said Beorn.
“Well to tell you the truth,
I did not like to bother you with a lot of us, until I found out if you were busy.
I will give a call, if I may.”
“Go on, call away!”
So Gandalf gave a long shrill whistle,
and presently Thorin and Dori came round the house by the garden path
and stood bowing low before them.
“One or three you meant, I see!”
said Beorn.
“But these aren’t hobbits,
they are dwarves!”
“Thorin Oakenshield,
at your service!
Dori at your service!”
said the two dwarves bowing again.
“I don’t need your service, thank you,”
said Beorn,
“but I expect you need mine.
I am not over fond of dwarves;
but if it is true
and you are Thorin
son of Thrain, son of Thror, I believe,
and that your companion is respectable,
and that you are enemies of goblins and are not up to any mischief in my lands —
what are you up to, by the way?”
“They are on their way to visit the land of their fathers, away east beyond Mirkwood,”
put in Gandalf,
“and it is entirely an accident
that we are in your lands at all.
We were crossing by the High Pass that should have brought us to the road that lies to the south of your country,
when we were attacked by the evil goblins —
as I was about to tell you.”
“Go on telling, then!”
said Beorn,
who was never very polite.
“There was a terrible storm;
the stone-giants were out hurling rocks,
and at the head of the pass we took refuge in a cave,
the hobbit and I and several of our companions …”
“Do you call two several?”
“Well, no.
As a matter of fact there were more than two.”
“Where are they?
Killed,
eaten,
gone home?”
“Well, no.
They don’t seem all to have come when I whistled.
Shy, I expect.
You see,
we are very much afraid that we are rather a lot for you to entertain.”
“Go on, whistle again!
I am in for a party, it seems,
and one or two more won’t make much difference,”
growled Beorn.
Gandalf whistled again;
but Nori and Ori were there almost before he had stopped, for,
if you remember,
Gandalf had told them to come in pairs every five minutes.
“Hullo!”
said Beorn.
“You came pretty quick —
where were you hiding?
Come on my jack-in-the-boxes!”
“Nori at your service,
Ori at …”
they began;
but Beorn interrupted them.
“Thank you!
When I want your help I will ask for it.
Sit down,
and let’s get on with this tale,
or it will be supper-time before it is ended.”